[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> One of the greatest surprises
for me was I thought everybody
wanted to heal.
It was such a shock
to me to realize
that healing is one of the
most intimidating journeys
of the human experience.
Have you ever met someone
for the first time--
could be a man,
could be a woman--
and instantly that
person started to share
all their problems with you?
Their aches, their
pains, problems
they have at work or
family, life in general.
And you've just met this
person, and all of a sudden you
know their entire
medical history?
Whether consciously
or unconsciously,
this person is living in
wounds, and that power of wounds
has become a very
seductive social tool,
it's powerful social
currency, and it's
become a powerful
language for people today.
It's what I call woundology.
Now most of us aren't this
obvious about our wounds,
or at least we would like
to think that we're not.
And while we assume that
we all want to heal,
the reality is that many
people fear becoming healthy
and that's extraordinary.
That may be hard for you
to hear and you may even
actually recoil at the
thought that people
find being healthy
frightening, even intimidating.
But in fact, what
I've learned is
that when we think
of being healthy,
we have to live up to
our fullest potential.
And while we like to imagine
our fullest potential,
actually living it is one of
the most frightening things
in the world.
We've created a
social environment,
in fact, in which
pain has privileges.
We expect to be rewarded or
compensated for our suffering,
and actually, that's what's made
us the litigious society we've
become.
So when our wounds prove to be
an effective way of influencing
others or controlling
others, healing
ceases to be the positive goal
that it looks like on paper,
and in fact, healing
becomes a threat.
I mean, this is amazing,
but health has never
had the cloud of a wound.
Just-- it's an extraordinary
thing to think of it.
But here's what's truth--
you're not meant
to stay wounded.
What in nature stays wounded?
Animals heal, nature heals,
trees heal, plants heal.
We are never meant
to stay wounded.
So why do we?
We have to move beyond the
consciousness of the wound,
and that's what I want
to talk to you about.
Breaking through a
pattern of woundology
is equal to or even more
rigorous than healing
the wound itself, and
understanding why it's
important can change your life.
So what is woundology and
what does it look like?
And I think the best way
for me to explain it to you
is to share a couple of
great woundology stories
and examples.
I was meeting a
friend for lunch,
and this friend was
approaching the table where
I was seated with
a couple of people
that I had just met--
we were all strangers.
And while we were
waiting for her,
another person came
in and asked her
if she happened to
be free on June 8.
Now all this individual asked
her was, are you free June 8?
And she was looking for
a yes or a no answer,
but instead, this
individual said, June 8?
No.
That is my incest
support group meeting
and I never let
these people down.
I'm always there on June 8,
I'm always there for them,
and we never ever
disappoint each other,
and she went on and on and on
for at least two-and-a-half
minutes.
Now this individual who had
asked the question said,
oh, OK, and walked away.
But I watched a
unbelievable display
of information roll out of her
that nobody needed to know.
Within two minutes,
all these strangers
knew that she had been
a victim of incest,
that she was angry about it,
that she was in a support
group, but that was just
the first layer of the cake.
The second was that
it was very obvious
that her intention in
communicating that information
was that she wanted them--
everybody at the table to
treat her in a certain way
because she was a, quote-quote,
"victim" of incest.
She had an agenda.
Later, when we were sitting
at lunch, I said to her,
I have to ask you a question--
why did you want them to know
you were wounded that way?
And I said, specifically
a victim of incest?
Because that's so
incredibly personal.
And she said, because I am.
Now that to me
open my eyes, and I
began to listen to
people differently.
That in fact, when we are
wounded, when we suffer,
part of us immediately engages
in who is responsible for this
and what am I owed as a result?
How should this
be repaired in me?
Now we don't realize that
woundology has become so much
a part of our subcutaneous
social tissue, but it has.
And we don't realize how much
we play the woundology card
in our lives, but we do.
We live in a society where being
wounded and using the wound
is deeply supported, and
it comes from the idea
that suffering somehow or
other shouldn't happen to us.
That there is something wrong
in the whole idea that how
could this happen to me?
We have an idea
deep in our core--
deep in our core, if we're
a good person, quote,
"bad things should
never happen to us."
That we should never be
wounded, that we should never
have a bad childhood,
that bad things
should never happen to
us in the first place.
But if they do, if
they do, somehow,
wounds become like a sieve,
and that the pain that we have,
we get to pass on because
we've never done anything
in the first place
to get this wound,
so we get to punish
other people with it.
We punish people, but we
are really raging at God.
We are angry that God
somehow messed up.
There's been a cosmic
glitch, and this situation
was not supposed to happen.
I'm upset that my life
is unfolding in a way
that I don't want
it to, and I need
to let everyone know
that I am angry.
The idea is that if I
can get angry enough,
that God, like a parent,
will finally cave
and I'll get what I want.
Now understand that
this is a deeply primal,
organic response.
This reaction is based on your
ancient tribal soul's belief.
How many times have
you either done this
or has it been done to you?
Where someone's come
home from work and said,
I've had a bad day, and
they've yelled at you?
Or you've yelled at them?
Or you've taken the
rage or the anger
and passed it through
you to somebody else?
You've used the wound
and delivered the rage.
And if you were
to heal that rage,
you wouldn't be able to
pass it on to someone else.
I've asked people
in my workshops
and I've said, how
many of you, how
many of you, when
you meet people,
make it a point to share your
wounds right up front when
you meet them?
Or within the early
stages, as a way of saying,
if you want to get
to know me better,
these are the things you
have to know about me.
You have to know
where I was wounded
and what my childhood was like
or what my past history was
like, you have to know that.
And mostly everybody raises
their hands and says,
yes, that's part of who I am
and that's part of my history.
And what it does
is it establishes
a type of wound intimacy
between two people,
so they feel like that
establishes a kind of wounded
language of how to
support me and what
I expect in terms of intimacy.
And without the wound,
a person doesn't
know how to be
sensitive, a person
doesn't know how
to be protected.
And if we don't have
that wounded language,
we don't know how to
also control somebody,
but you can't expect as much
from me because I'm not strong,
you can't you have
to take care of me,
I don't have to fulfill
all my responsibilities
because I'm not feeling well.
It is an extraordinary thing
to think that health requires
us to be fully empowered.
And so the wound, so long
as we hold onto the wound,
so long as we keep ourselves
not fully healthy, then
we have an excuse or
reasons to not carry
our full responsibility in
the world or in our life,
or to not quite be the
full person that we'd like
to imagine ourselves becoming.
So what is being whole and
why doesn't it appeal to us?
First of all, we don't have
a model, a template of what
a whole person is,
and actually, that
might sound extraordinary
to you, but it's the truth.
We speak about whole,
we talk about wholism,
we talk about
body, mind, spirit,
but actually, we don't
have a iconic whole person
that we say, that's
exactly what we want to be.
It doesn't appeal to us.
Because when we think
about being whole,
what we think about is being
invulnerable, being invincible,
and not having any entry
points to having needs,
being emotional, being
cozy and huggable.
We think about someone
who's very Herculean.
And so we hold onto our
wounds because that's
how we stay approachable.
That's how we think
we stay normal.
That's how we think we
stay needy, and we can--
not just needy, but we can
be needed by being wounded.
If we become totally healed
and whole, no one will need us,
and that is an unconscious fear.
Like, how will we ever attract
anyone to us if we're whole?
How will they find us?
I mean, if we don't--
we actually think that
the way we are needed
or the way we can
be in a relationship
is that we must be vincible,
we must be wounded.
Somehow, that's our
key to being partnered.
Secondly, there's a
vocabulary that we have
to bypass as a whole person.
For example, we can't
use the word blame.
We can't use the word deserve.
We can't take the things--
the events that happen to us
and say that it's anybody
else's fault because it's not.
This is a tactic
that doesn't work.
These are powerless strategies.
The shadow side of
the word "deserve"
often comes from
a wound, and you
will stay wounded in order
to indulge your weakness,
for example, an addiction.
And by saying that
you had a bad day,
you deserve to engage
that weakest part of you.
Pain becomes your
ticket, so to speak.
Because I've had a pain,
now I deserve a vacation.
I mean, without pain, how
will I ever get to Hawaii?
You have to evolve
beyond the point
that in order to
enjoy something,
you have to go through pain.
Think about how much in your
life, how many times you've
said, you know what?
I deserve this because
I've had a bad day,
or I deserve this because
nothing's working for me.
It's very difficult for
us to say, you know what?
I'm going to do this
because I want to.
Because I want to.
It's very difficult for
us to just go out and say,
you know what?
I'm going on vacation.
Everybody sits
around and says, why?
What's your reason?
Our whole social
way of thinking is
that we have to have
reasons for why we do
something nice for ourselves.
I get to have a vacation
because I'm exhausted,
or something bad happened,
so now I can balance it
with something good.
And that's where
the wound comes in.
I've had a terrible
time, so now I
deserve a very good time, ergo
the word "deserve" comes in.
Wounds have been very,
very helpful for us.
I was in Moscow one time.
It was 30 below zero, and
I'm waiting to get on a bus.
There's this long line,
and 30 below zero is cold.
And so all of these people
are waiting to get on a bus,
and up walks this man
to the head of the line,
and he's yelling
something in Russian,
and everybody has to get out of
his way, and they backed off,
and they let him get
on the bus first.
And someone that I was
with explained to me
that what he said was, I was
at the Battle of Stalingrad,
get out of my way,
and everybody did.
What he did was, he said, I
have suffered more than you--
move.
And everybody did.
He pulled out his wounds.
Now it's really extraordinary
that in our suffering,
we have this interesting
sense that life has
to balance somehow or other.
This one cannot be for nothing.
And so we have structured
our lives that in a sense,
we almost hold on to our wounds
until we get an explanation.
If it's the case, that this
wound is without reason
that's almost an
unbearable possibility.
So somehow we must find
reason in our suffering.
And that is part of the
interesting structure
of human nature.
There's got to be a reason.
But what do you do
if you recognize
you're a woundologist?
I use someone who
manipulates with your wounds,
and I'll ask you,
what's your style.
For example, I've said
to people in my workshop,
do you manipulate
with your wounds?
Do you, for example,
ever say things like,
I've had a worse time than you.
This comes from my
childhood, however it
is you manipulate people,
and it causes people
to treat you in a certain way.
Are you a wounded child?
Here's a very
popular archetype--
and I say archetype, the
wounded child archetype
is one of the most powerful
archetypes active in us today.
And that pattern in us from
feeling neglected as a child,
abandoned, abused, that part
can come out and very much
participate in your adult life.
And you can begin using
the pattern of the wounded
child in your everyday
life, or you could be
manipulated by a woundologist.
Here's one of my
favorite stories.
I was teaching a workshop one
time in northern Scotland.
There was a man in my
workshop and he was--
oh, he must've
been 70 years old.
And everything about him was
like a child, everything.
So this man, on break
time, comes back
to my workshop carrying a
teddy bear, a teddy bear.
Now-- and he's sitting there,
all the women around him
started to coddle him like,
oh, the poor little guy--
this was such a classic
example of a wounded
child in a 70-year-old body.
And I thought, are
you kidding me?
But it was working.
It was working.
He had absolutely no
intention, no intention
of ever breaking that pattern.
And here's the thing--
he was in a workshop
with me for healing.
For healing.
He had no intention of healing.
Now, here's the paradox in
our nature, don't you know it.
How often do we look
like we're healing,
walk like we're healing,
talk like it, but we're not?
But we're not?
This is what I mean
about woundology.
We set ourselves on the path
of wanting to be healthy,
and then we eat the wrong foods.
The excuses that we give
ourselves to overeat sugar
or to not exercise or to not do
what we know we should be doing
will always come from a wound.
So how do you break the pattern
of woundology in yourself?
First of all, we have to--
just assume you are,
because everybody is
a woundologist to some extent.
It's just a language
we've all learned to speak
because it's everywhere.
What we have to recognize is
that we are reason-driven.
We need a reason for everything.
And that that's
just the way we are,
and that if we
don't get a reason,
we will dwell in our wounds.
So the first thing about
breaking woundology
is that we have to
accept something.
There isn't a logical reason for
why things happen as they do.
There just isn't.
It would take a long
class and theology and who
knows what else,
but let's just get
to the point of accepting
that not one of us
is the center of the universe.
That the events that
happen in our lives
are not built around us.
That in fact, while there
may be reasons for why
things happen as they do--
and there certainly
are, the reasons why
they happen are not
built around any of us,
they're built around all of us.
And so we're all
in this together.
Forgiveness is the
counteract to woundology.
It doesn't make any
sense to reason.
Forgiveness is not something
the mind can pull off.
It's a mystical act of the soul.
It's something that defies
gravity, it defies reason.
It's the most unreasonable
thing you will ever do,
because you can't give yourself
a reasonable reason to forgive,
but it is the one thing that
disempowers your wounds.
Remember, wounds are
powerful social currency,
and they give you latitude to
indulge the worst part of you
sometimes.
Think of them as powerful allies
in weakening you and allowing
you to be carried on
the back of others
without shame or embarrassment.
If you have an agenda of wanting
someone to carry your weight,
most people won't own
that, therefore they
have to show up wounded and
expect to be taken care of.
Just like I spoke about
the self-esteem episode,
you must develop a
reverence for yourself
and respect for the journey
appealing the wound,
understanding that
a wound isn't meant
to be used as a power object.
A wound is a part of
life's natural challenges
that happened to all of us,
and it's up to all of us
to use the wound as a
means to enhance and build
our own character.
Getting out of woundology
also takes effort, meaning
you can't speak wound--
you can't speak your wound.
The opportunities
to use your wound
will come up again
and again, but you
have to catch yourself by
habit, and you have to stop
using your wound when
opportunities come up
and you realize, this is
a perfect chance for me
to manipulate, to one-up
someone when someone says,
oh, I had this
terrible experience
and blah, blah, blah,
blah, and how maybe it's
a classic time
where you would say,
you think you had
a bad day, while I
had wor-- you have an
opportunity to perhaps focus
on something good, an empowering
that happened to you instead
of something disempowering.
Now what if you're living
with a woundologist?
That switches everything around.
Living with a woundologist
is like living
with a vampire archetype.
I mean, they can suck the
oxygen out of the room
and you know it.
One of the most difficult
choices you make
is the day you stop responding
to the power of their wounds,
to the use of their wounds.
When the martyr says,
do you know how much
I have suffered for you?
It's up to you to be able
to say, I'm sure you have,
but I'm still leaving.
The day that their wound becomes
something you do not respond to
is a huge, huge game-changer for
both you and for that person.
It takes an enormous
amount of courage
to make a different
choice when you
are in a relationship
with a woundologist.
I think personally one of
the most courageous things
in the world is to
make a choice that
changes the dynamic in a
pattern between two people.
It's not a simple thing
to do, because you
change one pattern, one
choice, and the entire dynamic
will go in a different way.
Remember, nothing in life
is meant to stay wounded.
We will always end up getting
wounded one way or another,
because we are vulnerable, we're
in packages that wound easily,
but we're not meant
to stay wounded.
That's why we repair
ourself so fast.
That's why the moment
we have the slightest
injury, everything in our
body runs to that place
to begin to repair it.
Whether it's a break in
our skin or a broken bone,
everything in our body runs
to repair it so that it is--
it grows back and is replaced.
Nature, the forest, everything,
the ocean, everything
works to repair.
We're not meant to
dwell in wounds.
And one of the most challenging
things about a wound
is that it morphs our
thinking, and it causes us
at the end of the day to
think God made a mistake.
Heaven made a mistake.
That this shouldn't
have happened to us.
And let me say that
sometimes the size of a wound
is so extraordinarily
brutal, so horrible.
I mean, I have
come across people
who have been wounded in ways
that take my breath away.
It makes my eyes water when I--
I have to hold on to my
heart when I listen to them.
And when they talk
to me about it,
I begin secretly quietly praying
for them as I listen to them.
Because I sometimes
can't believe what
some-- what human beings have
put other human beings through.
But at the end of the
day, the choice we hear
is that we either get
bitter or we get better.
That's it.
The choice isn't that
we sit back and wait
for some form of explanation
to drop into our lap,
because that will never happen.
I can tell you,
as a historian, I
can tell you as someone who has
been in this business forever,
that has never happened.
Not even Jesus in the Garden
of Gethsemane somebody
got an answer to why do I have
to do this gig this weekend?
Nothing.
We will never have
our wounds explained.
We can only go forward
and say, somehow
in the grand scheme of things,
we're all in this together.
And nature has designed
one grand thing true--
we are all meant to
heal, and you will heal.
You will heal.
That's what you
have to trust is,
this is a journey
we're all in together.
So forward you go.
[MUSIC PLAYING]